




99
   16Viewgraph format: 1 per page A4 landscape
   3
   
   papersize=297mm,410mm
      
   16Viewgraph format: 2 per page A4 portrait
   1
   papersize=210mm,297mm
      

cmbx12 	
cmssdc10	
cmssdc7
cmssdc5
cmr8	

pt plus .2 pt	
pt	



Further Quantum Physics
#1height1.0pt

< #1 
 #1 >
< . #1  #2 >
0.35ex0.75ex
i
#1
#1
12 #1
#1#2

#1


0
   99
      
   
      
      
      height0.3pt
      
   

   


CWPP //





SUMMARY OF QM

FURTHER QUANTUM MECHANICS

Review of QM Concepts

Dr C W P PalmerHilary Term  

SUMMARY OF QM
Lecture 1: QM Concepts
Quantum Mechanics is based on three new concepts, none of
which have simple correlates in classical physics: 
 The state, or ket ;
 The probability amplitude, or amplitude .
 The operator ;

Combining the last two we obtain the final concept which derives from these:

The matrix element .
SUMMARY OF QM
The ket .
The ket is the complete quantum state of the system, from which we can
diagnose all its properties at a given time.

By contrast: the complete Classical State
The complete dynamical state of a classical system of particles consists of
the positions and momenta of all its particles (a point in phase space); or some other
set of variables equivalent to these. (Obviously this is not a complete
description - we would need to add something about what particles were at each
of the specified positions. But it is a complete set of dynamical information.)

Consider the planet Mercury, viewed as a point mass orbiting an
fixed attractive centre. We could specify its current position , relative to a
defined coordinate system, and its current momentum , or 
velocity  - a total of 6 variables. Or we could give the standard set
of orbital elements: (see http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/?ephemerides)

#&#&#&#
& Semi-major axis&&Longitude of Ascending Node
& Eccentricity   &&Argument of Perihelion
& Inclination    &   &Time of Perihelion Passage




SUMMARY OF QM
The ket .
But this example is dynamically equivalent (same force law) to Hydrogen. The
complete quantum state for Hydrogen  is specified by just three numbers:

 Principal quantum number (.)
 Angular Momentum quantum number ()
 Azimuthal quantum number ().

In fact these specify an orbit shape and inclination but none of the
parameters in left-hand column.

The ket specifies the state less completely than the classical
state.

But QM is right. So we should perhaps say

The classical state over-specifies the state.

and if we recall the uncertainty principle this is obvious.


But there is a choice about which if any of the classical variables are
defined by the ket . . .

SUMMARY OF QM
The amplitude .

Instead of the  states we could choose other complete sets of
kets:
: the particle is at  (but momentum is
quite unknown);
: the particle has momentum  (but position
is quite unknown);
: a moving wave-packet ket, with a range
of positions around  and a range of momenta around ;

These specify some things more precisely than the  kets,
and some things less precisely. So the kets overlap in some sense. 

 denotes the probability amplitude that a particle whose
state is the ket  is found to be in the ket .

SUMMARY OF QM
Aside on Probability and Probability Amplitude:

Probability (and probability density) are classical concepts. In all
cases they are used to answer incompletely specified problems - ignorance of
some aspect of the system - epistemic probability.

Probability amplitude is a new concept invented for QM: a complex
number whose square is a a probability (or probability density). Why?

Linearity of ket space - amplitudes can add or cancel -
interference, waves. You need this to be able to make all the various kets of
the previous page (how else can you combine different complete sets of 
information and make some information more precise and some less precise?).

So the desire to permit wave-like phenomena, like interference, has the effect
that the primary quantity of the theory is not directly accessible. - measurable
things tend to involve squaring something.

SUMMARY OF QM
The operator : 

Having introduced linearity, so that
kets are elements of a linear vector space (i.e. we can add them and multiply
by numbers) then it follows that we can have linear operators, and these turn
out to represent observables. Given an operator  we can find eigenkets



Hermitian operators play a special role because then several special things
happen:

 is real
 Eigenkets belonging to different eigenvalues are orthogonal
.
 The set of eigenkets is complete: .

Eigenkets of  represent states in which the observable  has the
value . 

SUMMARY OF QM
The Measurement Postulate: 


If we measure the observable  on
a state  then:

(i) The result is one of the eigenvalues of , 
(ii) with probability .
(iii)After the measurement the state is .

The first two parts simply follow from our definition of amplitude and
interpretation of eigenkets. So the measurement postulate defines the complete
probability distribution of possible outcomes . The expectation value
of the distribution is, as for any other probability distribution,
 and it's easy to show this is equal to .  


The last part here is the collapse of the wavefunction and is a big
deal. No other part of QM has occasioned so much (or such bad-tempered)
dispute. This is the measurement problem. PP's take note.

SUMMARY OF QM
The Matrix Element :


Consider finding the expectation of  in a superposition state
. 

(The basis  is unrelated to ;
e.g.  is position and the basis states are energy eigenstates).


Then clearly we just substitute into both bra and ket:




which we can conveniently write in a matrix and vector notation:






where . It's called a matrix element because it's
an element of a matrix! The matrix is the representative of the operator  in this basis.

The vector  is the representative of the ket  in the
basis . It's elements are . (But the restriction
to just three states is just for this example - it's an infinite vector
unless we have a reason to focus on just a subset of states.)

SUMMARY OF QM
Dynamics:

States evolve in time - so kets evolve in time:



where  is the Hamiltonian operator (the energy expressed as a function of
position and momentum). 


This looks really simple if  does not depend on
time: compare



Can we do the same here? Well we need to make the operator come before the ket:



and we need to know how to take the exponential of an operator - use the
series expansion:




Since powers of  are well defined, and we can add kets together, this isn't
mathematical nonsense! And in fact it solves the Schrodinger equation - and
is the usual solution!

SUMMARY OF QM
It looks particularly simple when we expand the ket at  in
terms of the eigenkets of : 




(These are time-independent kets. Sometimes time-dependent energy eigenkets 
are used, but I will always be explicit if I use them.) Then





So that our superposition state is just a sum of these

(t)=_ic_i(-iE_it/)E_i.

The operator  is called the time development
operator or the propagator because it propagates the ket forward in
time from  to .  It is also unitary:  which has the
important consequence that the normalisation is conserved:




SUMMARY OF QM
Example: Particle in a box
We consider a box of width , from  to . Then the eigenfunctions and
eigenvalues are easily found:




(You may have see a version of this with a different definition of , and
symmetry about ; this version has the nice property that we have a single
formula for all the eigenfunctions).

To see wavepackets based on this see: (linked from FQM webpage)

http://www.physics.ox.ac.uk/users/palmerc/tdseApplet.htm

Correspondence Principle: One implication of this follows from
the time-dependence that we get in expectation values:



where  is the classical orbit frequency as a function of energy.

SUMMARY OF QM
Commutators
One of the most striking non-classical features of QM is the
non-commutation of operators representing classical variables. What does it
mean?

: There is a really powerful theorem, which we will use
repeatedly, which states that if two operators commute then there exists a
complete set of mutual eigenkets :


.
This also implies that the observables  and  can be measured compatibly.

(There is a slight wrinkle concerning degeneracy).

: In the case of operators commuting with the Hamiltonian then there
is a further consequence: for any state , the expectation value
of  is independent of time



and in a borrowing of classical terminology  is often referred to as a
constant of the motion. 
Note that this is true for all  commuting with 
even if they don't commute with each other.  for all
components of , so all are constants of the motion.  

SUMMARY OF QM
Commutators
(Finally there are commutators of the form  for
some real number . This
implies that  is a ladder operator: but it can't be a classical observable!
That's because if  and  are Hermitian then 
is anti-Hermitian: that is, a Hermitian operator multipled by . The
absence of an  on the RHS means that  is neither Hermitian nor
anti-Hermitian.) 

Scaling the Hamiltonian

The harmonic oscillator Hamiltonian in the -representation contains three
constants:



This means we can devise a system of units specially adapted for the
oscillator:
#&#
Constant&Dimensions3pt
&
&
&

Thus  has dimensions of mass,  of time and
 of length, and in these units the unit of energy is .

SUMMARY OF QM

We now switch to these units - we define 

which gives the time-independent Schrodinger equation as




 cancels throughout to leave 



which is the underlying equation stripped of constants.


In these units  the eigenvalues are just , 

the ground
state wavefunction is
 

and the creation operator is  where .

We can always recover the wavefuction in standard units by replacing
 with  and multiplying the wavefuntion by 
 because  has dimensions of :





